# Income Gap and Education Profile in Toronto's Neighbourhoods
In collaboration with [diegoarmaca](https://github.com/diegoarmaca)

## Summary of Findings
Education is a contributor to many beneficial socio-economic outcomes. We intend to exam the education profile in the selected neighbourhoods of Toronto that have polarized household income from the data set package *Wellbeing Toronto - Demographics: NHS Indicators*. We first observe that the income gap between the neighbourhood with the highest household income and the lowest is enormous. The median household income of Bridle Path-Sunnybrook-York Mills is almost nine times more than Regent Park before tax. Bridle Path-Sunnybrook-York Mills also has a much higher attainment rate (45%) of higher education above a bachelor's degree than Regent Park (23%) and the City of Toronto (27%). We intend to use the comparison to bring awareness of inequality in income and education existing in the City of Toronto.

## Data: Wellbeing Toronto - Demographics: NHS Indicators
*Wellbeing Toronto - Demographics: NHS Indicators* provides information from the 2011 National Household Survey (NHS) and presents a profile of Toronto across 140 neighbourhoods. There are two data sets in this package used in the analysis: _Demographics NHS Indicators 2011_ and _Education NHS Indicators 2011_. In _Demographics NHS Indicators 2011_, the indicators we are interested in are *Median household total income* and *Median after-tax household income*, which show the median household income of every neighbourhood before and after tax is applied. We identify the neighbourhood with the highest median household income (Bridle Path-Sunnybrook-York Mills) and the neighbourhood with the lowest median household income (Regent Park). We then calculate the median household income of Toronto as summary statistics.

## Method: K-Means, Density-Based Classification, Heirarchical Clustering
Exposing the most disadvantaged neighbourhoods in the City of Toronto is a classification case. The goal is to group all neighbourhoods by clusters based on how similar they are. To achieve this, the classification method used is hierarchical clustering, an unsupervised machine learning technique that partitions a set of objects with similar characteristics into subsets.

Different approaches were analyzed. Clustering techniques such as K-means, Density-based classification, and Hierarchical clustering were tested out with the dataset, finding the last one the most suitable for this investigation. Hierarchical clustering allows us to view at once, each possible number of clusters (k) through the dendrogram, which is a tree representation of those clusters. Moreover, the hierarchical method needs no k in advance. The undetermination of k is important because the purpose of this study is to find the most disadvantaged neighbourhoods without pre-assumption on the number of groups there should be. Lastly, by using the Elbow curve, the best number of clusters (k) can be impartially calculated.

### See the [PDF file](neighbourhoods_clustering.pdf) for R code, data visualization and full analysis
